Title: Caliban and the Witch

----

Reading:

- readings/caliban-and-the-witch

----

Text:

We began our discussion with the essay “Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/Truth/Freedom." Building on our conversation from the week before, we started by observing again how Wynter’s method is integral to her argument. As she elaborates in the first footnote, hers is an anti-disciplinary method, so the structure of the essay is itself unfaithful to any one disciplinary approach. As the footnote makes clear, the way in which knowledge is presently organized provides the conditions for our current conception of Man, which we misrecognize as the only possible articulation of the human. The present orders of knowledge give us a genre of the human that is narrowly conceived in the image/sociogeny of Western Europe—a concept of Man that is contingent upon the definition of Black and Native peoples as the Lack of Man. Because our current organization of knowledge is the problem, Wynter calls on us to transform the knowledge orders we have inherited in order to make a new genre of the human. She suggests that this new genre of the human can be made through a new science of the word--an epistemic challenge that she directs most explicitly to intellectuals. When Wynter says that it’s our present epistemological order that sets the conditions of our being in the narrow genre of man that we’re currently in, she is describing both the accumulated knowledge that is canonized in academic disciplines and our implicit participation in reproducing that system. All of the ways that we are compelled to reproduce our present knowledge system—all of the ways our present system is reproduced is captured in the way she uses the term autopoiesis. 

We then spent some time looking at passages that exemplify how she understands autopoiesis, including a passage on page 271 where she describes an autopoietic system as one where the “descriptive statements” or “governing codes” (the "sociogenic principle") come to function as an objective set of facts for a particular society and the way these "facts" or "truth" (which are always partial and motivated to uphold the current order) are brought into existence, produced, and reproduced. This production and reproduction describes the autopoetic dynamic that preserves the epistemic order of the whole system. It is also operative in the “truths-for” – the way that a “truth” (always a partial truth) serves hegemonic interests and functions to reproduce the dynamics by which a certain knowledge regime predominates. We also looked briefly at passages on pages 272, 273, 307, and 326 (which includes the useful example of how the US curriculum upholds racist hierarchies).

I then shared the schematic chart I made so we could dig into the ways she theorizes continuities of racial logic across the discontinuities of different epistemes. We traced, for example, how the dominant epistemic regimes up to the Renaissance were organized through what she calls a “supernaturally determined order,” which includes the notion that people are enslaved to Original Sin (and all that goes along with that, like how the clergy are God’s Elect versus how the laity must be Redeemed through religious practices organized through the Church, etc.) and then how this was in conflict with yet comes to be integrated into emergent iconographies and philosophies of the modern era. Wynter describes modern knowledge regimes as constituted through “naturally determined” secular terms, especially Reason. Whereas the supernaturally determined order was premised on the idea of meaning being organized according to God/the cosmos, the modern era is defined on the model of a natural organism/Reason. Although she is marking an epochal shift from a supernatural causation (what god ordains) to a natural causation (what is “found” in nature), she notes that the same explanatory principle is at play in both. That is, although the epistemes changed, they both reproduced a logic that sought to legitimate the expropriation and internment of Native peoples and the mass enslavement of people from the African continent. Put simply, the terms change, but those who are subjugated stay the same—this is why Wynter sees knowledge systems as the source of the problem, but also the source of the “cure.” 

Everything pertaining to the epistemes dominated by reason, Wynter refers to as producing Man 1. Man 2 comes about with another epistemic shift, this time one that promotes a bio-economic subject, which is partly due to the rise and intensification of capitalism and partly due to the prominence of the scientific account of Man as a purely biological entity. Man 2 is therefore defined as a Jobholding Breadwinner, an Investor, a Capital Accumulator. As she notes, it is in this context that Dubois’ “color line” comes to be a new principle of nonhomogeneity, separating white/nonwhite, Men/Natives. This color line will now be discursively and institutionally deployed as a “space of Otherness” on which to project an idea of genetic difference: those selected-by-Evolution (much as it used to be those chosen by god) versus those dysselected-by-Evolution (much as it used to be the unredeemable sinners/or “irrational” “savages”). The Color (cum Colonial) Line thus comes to operate in a way analogous to earlier divisions: Heaven/Earth, supralunar/sublunar, and by the rational humans/irrational animals and it is this categorization that designates people as deserving or undeserving within our contemporary Western bourgeois order. And she goes on to say that this “new master code” comes to function at all levels of the social order: class, gender, sex. or, superior/inferior ethnicities, and of the Investor/Breadwinners versus the criminalized jobless Poor, etc. We can see from this essay, as well as from the feminist essay from this week, that she sees these categories as operating by analogy. 

She ultimately wants a different answer to the question of who we are and again turns to Fanon who provided the perspective of a “native colonized,” a distinctive genre of being at odds with his episteme, a perspective that enabled him to put forward the concept of sociogeny, which functions in a "space of transculture" from which to redefine the human. Whereas the genre of Man produced by Western Europe is a culturally specific genre of the human that stands in for all humans--a production that hides its own Western European authorship--Fanon’s concept of sociogeny and Césaire’s standpoint of “liminal deviance” provides a new model, a model that takes into account the (marginalized) perspective of the human creating the (new) system. This is what makes the poiesis of Fanon and Cesaire different from, say, Sepulveda--the inclusion of an account of the “authorial” position in “authored” conception of the human—it therefore reconciles the opposition, the split, between Man and its Others instituted by prior knowledge regimes. Fanon, as she says, does not “echo” (the knowledge of the dominant episteme) but rather uses his own voice—this is how his poiesis interrupts the autopoietic system. Similarly, she notes that Cesaire provides a new science of the word that will lead to the specific orders of consciousness wherein we can experience ourselves as a new genre of being human. 

We then turned to the essay, "Beyond Liberal and Marxist Leninist Feminisms," where we again discussed the importance of method and structure to the way Wynter elaborates her argument. Like other texts we've read, this one also draws on a range of thinkers and works analogically to advance an analysis of "classarchy"--her term that describes an order based on middle class and patriarchal models of the human. She emphasizes two examples--that of wages for housework and non-(hetero-)normative sexuality--for the ways they challenge the centrality of production in Liberal and Marxist Leninst frameworks: housework is engaged in the reproductive aspects of the social order (whether childrearing or reproducing the conditions of everyday life); queer sexuality, in her view, disrupts the norms around natural and unnatural. In effect, Wynter mobilizes the argument of wages for housework against Marxist Leninist formulations that privilege labor (showing how women's unremunerated housework is essential to yet excluded from capitalist logic) and she mobilizes an analysis of lesbian sexuality (paradoxically drawing on the work of Catherine MacKinnon) to critique patriarchal norms of heterosexuality and its representations of woman as not-man (or not-Phallus/not-Father). For Wynter, both of these "liminal categories" expose the false universality of the claims of Liberal and Marxist models, as well as how those models were taken up by feminism. This view is consistent with how she identifies a poiseis to disrupt the autopoietic dynamic in closed systems (we've seen this in other texts we've read). She charts a parallel between the "mere maintenance" role of housewives and the role of Third world workers as producers of "mere raw materials," observing the way both are considered "outside" a Marxist order of value in order to link feminist movements in the US to global anti-capitalist movements.